Alvin Toffler.
We have encountered this man earlier too.
1970, FIFTY YEARS ago, he had predicted already!
The illiterate of the 21st century will not
be those who cannot read and write, but those
who cannot learn, unlearn, and relearn!
How beautiful!
Namaste!
Four hundred and fourteen!
Learn, Unlearn, Relearn!
Only when I was looking for a suitable Tamil
translation did it suddenly occur to me that..
"Hey, that thing Learn is படி, and then
there is a மறுபடி, which is..
மறுபடி, திருப்பி,
மறு..
படி, but if you look at மறு independently,
hey, that is what is Unlearning!
மறு… to reject whatever knowledge
you thought you had acquired.
Something that you had thought to be right,…
you tell yourself, hey, unload that junk,
it is no longer worth it!
So, படி, மறு, மறுபடி!
Did you like it?
Alright, let us dive right in!
Dots!
We discussed them in the previous episode
too.
It is all about Collecting the dots, we concluded!
Connecting comes after Collecting, Emerging
comes after Connecting, and finally, we have
Sharing.
But…
do you realise?
It becomes one eternal, endless cycle?
We collect a lot of Dots.
We could call that a Learning phase, perhaps.
And then, we strive to Learn even more.
And for that, we try to Connect them all up.
Oh, this one and that one, there is a connection.
This happens because of that.
This happens along with that.
This happens for that.
And so on.
We try making a lot of Connections.
That is the Learning phase.
But, along the way, life is not such a beautiful
honeymoon.
Along the way, you also get into this..
A beginner-level learner, what does he say?
Oh my God, I haven't learned everything there
is to, in this..
The circle is still unfilled!
Oh my, I have acquired this, but looks like
this is toxic, troublesome.
Bad knowledge!
This is irrelevant.
This is useless.
And, Oh, there is a connection that is supposed
to exist between this and that, but it is
currently missing!
These..
these happen in the Unlearning phase.
Only after that, we realise what is important,
what is needed in more quantity, what is to
be explored broadly, and what deeply, that
is when you enter the Relearning phase.
So, Learn, Unlearn, and Relearn.
If we were to take a simple example, Mathematics…
Primitive Man, when he realised that he had
countable fingers in his hand, he started
keeping track of animals.
And, one of the things he told himself was,
"If you have some, and I have some, and we
bring them together, we will have more!"
A fundamental truth of Mathematics, he thought.
A number and another number, both of which
could be represented by fingers, when put
together, will actually yield a higher number..
But, did we stop fiddling with it??
Did we?
This is what we ended up doing!
We created a number called Zero!
Where do we go to represent it?
Which finger would that be?
So, whatever we were thinking till now, "A
number and another number, will always yield
a larger number in addition?"
Sorry, wrong, that assumption has been proved
baseless!
Then we entered the world of minuses, negative
numbers.
Then we drilled down to fractions, half, quarter,
all the way down to irrational numbers, repeatable,
non-repeatable,… all the way to Pi!
So, we had to Unlearn a lot of the fundamentals
that we thought were etched in stone.
So many things that we thought as unbreakable
rules and unfalsifiable truths…?
We had to tell ourselves, "Sorry, no, I don't
have to believe that as the truth any longer"!
But, you know what happened in that cycle?
We Learned. and then, we had to Unlearn.
But you know where the last phase of Learning
happened?
It happened when we realised that numbers
were actually points on a plane!
There is an axis called the Imaginary Axis.
There is a Real Axis.
And, in that plane, if we were to throw a
stone and see it land, and if we had to represent
the location of the stone accurately, those
are numbers!
And, hence, there are infinite numbers.
And, every position can be uniquely represented!
And, when we get that sort of knowledge, that
level of abstraction, that is when we realise:
what we Learned was true, what we Unlearned
was important, and what we have now Relearned,
subsumes what we Learned and what we Unlearned.
It puts them all together in a simpler package
for us.
Only now, all the Dots are Connected completely!
When you Learn, you actually learn it from
a Guru.
You don't know it.
You go to somebody who knows it.
They even call it the Guru Effect.
You have to be wary of the Guru Effect.
It is the tendency for people to "judge as
profound, what they have failed to grasp"!
It is called the Guru Effect.
You have to be careful about that.
But, in this phase, you actually approach
a Guru, a Mentor, a person who has already
been there and done that, and import, download,
knowledge from them.
You Learn.
The second phase is Unlearn.
That's when you meet a lot of mentors and
you realise, "Hey, both of them can't be true!
Dr. Einstein says something.
The Sadguru says something else.
How can both coexist?
There is friction when they come together.
How can both of these be right about the way
the universe works?"
That is when you Collect, that is when you
sort things out, you sift through the accumulated
content, and then you realise, "This little
bit that this guy said is right, while the
other bit the other guy spoke of is right
too, and these two can coexist in this universe!"
You create YOUR version!
That is the Unlearning phase.
And, who is the Guru during this Unlearning
phase?
Well, YOU are!
You teach yourself your version of how the
world operates around you.
And then comes the third phase.
In the first phase, you Learn from your Guru.
In the second phase, you are your own Guru.
They call him a Swayamaaccharya.
I dictate to myself what is right based on
all the probably conflicting things I have
heard around in my world, and create something
that will not give me sleepless nights.
What is the third phase?
Learn.
Unlearn.
The third phase is Relearn.
While Relearning, who is your Guru?
The people you meet.
The co-learners.
The Gurus are quite a small number.
But, interested adults are way too many.
And, after the first two phases, you are ready
to fill in the gaps.
You are ready to take in other conflicting
opinions people have built.
Like you, they must have done the first two
phases too!
You go in search of people who have aced the
first two phases, find them, and share your
version.
And they will share theirs.
It is OK to have conflict!
In the second phase, we were wondering how
to resolve conflict!
In the first phase, there is really no place
for conflict!
You are just learning the one right way to
do something.
But in the third phase, conflicts can happily
coexist, you are told!
In the third phase, what is the warning for
us?
What is that something to be careful about?
However diverse a cross-section of people
you can meet, men, women, whites, blacks,
rich people, poor people, all kinds of people,
the better for you.
They have to be there in that mix of versions
that you collect.
Only when you collect conflicting and not-easily-indigestible
versions, your Relearning phase begins, and
gets you ready for the Big Bad World!
We have seen the Golden Circle of Simon Sinek.
Hope you remember it!
What do we do in the Learn phase?
We learn WHAT it is.
What is this?
Division?
Long form division?
Organic Chemistry?
Finding out of a square root?
Something or the other.
We understand WHAT it is.
That, by itself, is a tall order.
So, it takes time.
In this phase, we are told to do it in one
manner, and we just do it in that manner.
Only in the Unlearning phase, we understand
the HOW a bit more.
We have been told to do it this way.
But there are other ways to do the same thing.
We realise that all of these can coexist!
So, in Mathematics, for example, you may have
approached quite a lot of problems algebraically.
When you get to the higher classes, you realise
that there is a geometric solution to this,
which is a lot more elegant.
Multiple pathways, leading to the same answer!
Why, let us consider religion!
We had been thinking all along that there
is but one God.
Just one religion.
But, when we encounter other religions and
the beauties that exist in them, that is where
we realise that the HOWs can be many.
That is the Unlearning phase.
And then, the final phase, is when we learn
the WHY.
Why do we do Mathematics?
What's up with Religion?
Why are we on the quest for a God?
The WHY!
Simon had already proposed that we should
start with WHY.
But, for that WHY to percolate inside and
have a clear impact, we must have Learned,
and we must have Unlearned.
That is when we are ready for our personal
WHY.
Looking at the trio once again, we can see
them as a timeline too.
What do you Learn?
You learn about the past.
We learn about some random guy having fought
a war and won.
We learn about another random guy having sat
under a tree and achieved enlightenment.
We learn about somebody who has mixed one
chemical element with another chemical element
and created a new compound.
We learn history.
We learn from the past.
Where do you think is the Unlearning happening?
Right now!
As you are watching this video, the Unlearning
is happening.
You are breaking down some of the things that
don't really work with your mindset, you are
making new connections, and you are basically
realising, "What got me here won't get me
there!"
A colleague of mine told this to me very beautifully,
recently.
She said, the first iota of enlightenment
a butterfly gets is the lesson that all the
lessons that the butterfly had learned as
a caterpillar are no longer relevant, and
that it needs to relearn.
It needs to unlearn and it needs to relearn.
That is the first revelation it gets when
it spreads its wings for the first time.
Otherwise, it will be crawling around on a
branch.
Only because it has that revelation, it is
able to fly away.
What got you here, won't get you there.
So, that was the Past, Learning..
And the Present.
Which is Unlearning.
The Future, is about your Relearning.
What does that mean?
Relearn in the Future?
Well, while learning a subject, we think it
is simplistic.
The Moon.
We are told it is a silver plate up in the
sky.
Wrong, but it is Simplistic.
The mother is able to teach it to the young
child, and the child believes it.
But as your learning grows, as you understand
about planets and solar systems, gravity,
you actually realise that you have to Unlearn
a lot of grandma stories.
And, you realise you actually know LESSER
about something now.
I don't know what the Moon is.
I thought it was a silver plate.
I don't know if it is a large rock.
I have to go, check it out.
And that is when complications and complexity
bother your mind.
You are at your lowest.
But, from that simplistic world, after Learning
all that junk, you learn the complications
world, where you have to probably Unlearn,
and that takes you, if you are AT IT, if you
try hard enough long enough, you get to the
simple world.
Simple is different from Simplistic.
What is Simple?
That the Apple that falls when ripe, off the
tree and to the ground, is acted upon by the
same force that pulls the beautiful moon every
night to spin around the Earth!
Gravity!
G M1 M2 divided by R Squared!
Newton!
That is the elegant simplicity we all want.
But, we have to Learn, Unlearn, and have the
space into which the Relearning can happen.
We often hear the cliches.
Ask advice from the elders.
Follow the advice you get from elders.
etc.
We tell our elders "I will follow what you
say!".
But, why do we do that?
This is my Dad.
As a young Air Force officer.
He hadn't even married by that time.
And then, he got married.
And then he got old.
He lived past the age of 80.
He has had experiences.
I have followed his advice.
Quite a lot!
In fact, whenever I strayed off the beaten
path, disobeying his advice, I have been beaten
up badly by Life!
Why do we seek the advice of elders?!
I saw a beautiful quote!
Why?
Is it to learn from them?
To Learn and then realise that they are wrong
and Unlearn?
And then, having Unlearned, reject their advice
from now on and Relearn by ourselves?
No!
We don't seek the advice of elders because
they are always right!
We seek their advice specifically because
they have more experience being wrong!
They have stumbled many times!
They don't want you to stumble the same way
unnecessarily!
You need to stumble too, but in other, new,
potentially useful ways!
You need time for that!
It is an opportunity for you to live in a
day, the life he has lived in eighty years.
He gives you that bit of advice.
All the mistakes.
All the failings.
All the shortcomings.
Take it… if you want.
Else, suffer and struggle through it like
a fool.
That is why we go to the Elders!
Closing thought on this Dots concept.
We saw Alvin Toffler earlier, didn't we?
We saw a quotation by him.
Shall we google for it?
This is the only quote that comes up in that
context.
Learn, Unlearn, Relearn!
Okay, I have that very book!
I have an electronic library!
Shall we go to that library, I thought!
Shall we see the very page where he talks
about it?
I did.
And surprise!
ZERO results!
You know what the original quote is?
It was really shocking!
The original quote goes like this!
"Tomorrow's illiterate will not be the man
who can't read or write; he will be the man
who has not learned how to learn!"
So, Learn, Unlearn, Relearn, are compressed
together into a quintessential phrase.
Learning how to Learn.
If you focus on that alone, even if you learn
ONLY THAT, you don't need a school, you don't
need a college, you don't need a teacher!
Wherever you go, whoever you meet, whatever
you see, will be, at that moment, the best
teacher you could have had!
All the best!
We will meet you soon!
Thank you!